>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, DECEMBER 14:
LATE NIGHT DEAL, THE SENATE
PASSES THE $1.1 TRILLION
SPENDING BILL THAT KEEPS THE
GOVERNMENT RUNNING.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
TWO YEARS AFTER THE TRAGEDY AT
SANDY HOOK ELEMENTARY, WE LOOK
AT CONNECTICUT'S GUN LAWS WHICH
ARE NOW SOME OF THE MOST
RESTRICTIVE IN THE NATION.
>> I CAN'T LET IT BE A SENSELESS
TRAGEDY BECAUSE IT WAS A
PREVENTABLE TRAGEDY.
>> YOU CAN CHANGE A MAGAZINE IN
LITERALLY ONE SECOND.
>> WE'VE SEEN A DRAMATIC DROP IN
MURDERS IN OUR STATE.
>> THE LAW'S NOT GOING TO CATCH
POSSIBLE MASS MURDERERS?
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
LATE LAST NIGHT THE SENATE
PASSED A SWEEPING $1.1 TRILLION
SPENDING BILL, HEADING OFF A
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN FOR AT LEAST
THE NEXT FISCAL YEAR.
THE PRESIDENT IS EXPECTED TO
SIGN IT.
DESPITE IT'S PASSAGE, THE BUDGET
PLAN HAS DRAWN CRITICISM FROM
BOTH DEMOCRATS AND TEA PARTY
REPUBLICANS.
BESIDES FUNDING THE MILITARY AND
FIGHTING EBOLA, THE BILL ALSO
RELAXES SCHOOL NUTRITION
STANDARDS, CLEARS THE WAY FOR
MUCH LARGER CAMPAIGN
CONTRIBUTIONS FROM WEALTHY
INDIVIDUAL DONORS, AND INCLUDES
A CONTROVERSIAL ROLLBACK ON BANK
REGULATIONS PUT IN PLACE AFTER
THE FINANCIAL CRISIS IN 2008.
FOR SOME MORE INSIGHT WE ARE
JOINED FROM WASHINGTON D.C. BY
NIELS LESNIEWSKI OF ROLL CALL.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> SO LAST NIGHT WE WERE HEADED
HOME THINKING THAT THIS WAS
GOING TO DRAG OUT FOR ANOTHER
FEW DAYS.
WHAT HAPPENED, HOW DID THIS GET
THROUGH?
>> WELL, WHAT WE HAD IN THE
SENATE ON THE FLOOR OF THE
SENATE WAS WHAT WE MIGHT CALL
SATURDAY NIGHT MAGIC.
IT'S THE KIND OF THING THAT
OFTEN TAKES PLACE ON THURSDAYS
BUT THIS TIME IT HAD TO WAIT
UNTIL SATURDAY AS LAWMAKERS
REACHED AN AGREEMENT TO MOVE
AHEAD ALL THE WAY THROUGH TO
PASSING THE JUST OVER TRILLION
DOLLAR SPENDING PACKAGE, AND
INSTEAD OF HAVING PROCEDURAL
VOTES THAT EXTENDED UNTIL 1:00
IN THE MORNING AND THEN COMING
BACK MONDAY AT ABOUT 7:30 IN THE
MORNING THEY DECIDED TO GET
EVERYTHING DONE.
AND AS A RESULT, THEY ARE DONE
WITH THAT PIECE OF THE PUZZLE
AND THEY COME BACK ON MONDAY
REALLY ON MONDAY AFTERNOON FOR A
BUNCH OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
NOMINATIONS.
BUT THE GOVERNMENT FUNDING
SITUATION IS RESOLVED.
>> OKAY AS WITH ALL COMPROMISES
IT USUALLY LEAVES SOME PEOPLE
HAPPY.
USUALLY IT SEEMS MORE PEOPLE
FROM THE LEFT ARE MORE ANGRY AT
PRESIDENT OBAMA OR THE
DEMOCRATIC SENATORS.
>> YES, THE ANGER THIS TIME WAS
SOMEWHAT PALPABLE ON THE LEFT
AND EVEN ACTUALLY TOO THERE ARE
SOME ON THE RIGHT WHO HAD
SIMILAR VIEWS ABOUT THE BANKING
PROVISIONS THAT WERE INCLUDED,
SEEMINGLY IN THE LAST MINUTE, IN
THE COMPROMISE AGREEMENT, IT
ROLLED BACK OF A PROFESSION OF
THE DODD FRANK FINANCIAL
REGULATORY OVERHAUL RELATED TO
THE TREATMENT OF SWAPS
TRANSACTIONS.
AND L BASICALLY TAKING DOWN A
BIT OF A FIRE WALL THAT HAD BEEN
BUILT IN BANKING ACTIVITIES.
BUT THE OTHER THING TOO IS, IS
THAT THE FOLKS WHO ARE ON THE
MORE CONSERVATIVE END OF THE
SPECTRUM WERE NOT PLEASED OVER
THE FACT THAT THE BILL DID NOT
DO ANYTHING SUBSTANTIVELY TO
ATTACK THE PRESIDENT'S EXECUTIVE
ACTION ON IMMIGRATION.
SO THERE WAS SORT OF ALL COMERS
HAD SOMETHING NOT TO LIKE WHICH
IS PROBABLY WHY THERE WERE LOTS
OF VOTES AGAINST IT ON BOTH ENDS
OF THE SPECTRUM.
>> OKAY.
IMMIGRATION STILL WILL BE
DEBATED JUST AT A LATER DATE.
THERE IS KIND OF A CLIFF AT THE
END OF FEBRUARY WHERE THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
NEEDS MORE FUNDING, RIGHT?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND THAT'S WHAT THE REPUBLICAN
LEADERSHIP ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
CAPITAL HAVE BEEN SAYING SINCE
THE BEGINNING WAS LOOK, LET'S
PUNT THIS ISSUE UNTIL THE
REPUBLICANS ARE IN CONTROL OF
THE SENATE.
WHEN THERE MIGHT BE SOME
OPPORTUNITY TO ACTUALLY MAKE A
SUBSTANTIVE POLICY CHANGE.
YOU KNEW THAT WITH THE DEMOCRATS
IN CONTROL OF THE SENATE, YOU
WERE GOING TO HAVE DIFFICULTY
GETTING ANYTHING THROUGH IT ALL
IN THE MEANTIME.
BUT AT LEAST COME FEBRUARY FROM
THEIR POINT OF VIEW, THAT WILL
BE A CHANCE TO FORCE SOMETHING
MAYBE TO PRESIDENT OBAMA'S DESK.
>> ALL RIGHT, NIELS LESNIEWSKI
OF ROLL CALL JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> BLACK MEN AT THE HANDS OF
POLICE
>> Sreenivasan: TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF DEMONSTRATORS
MARCHED IN MAJOR CITIES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY YESTERDAY,
PROTESTING THE DEATHS OF UNARMED
BLACK MEN AT THE HANDS OF
POLICE.
THE VAST MAJORITY WERE PEACEFUL,
BUT THERE WERE A FEW
CONFRONTATIONS WITH POLICE,
INCLUDING AN ATTACK ON TWO
N.Y.P.D. LIEUTENANTS FROM
PROTESTERS WHO VENTURED ONTO THE
BROOKLYN BRIDGE.
NEITHER OFFICER SUFFERED LIFE-
THREATENING INJURIES.
THEIR ATTACKERS WERE NOT
ARRESTED.
BUT IN CALIFORNIA, 45 PEOPLE
WERE ARRESTED IN SAN FRANCISCO
AND OAKLAND.
ANOTHER 23 WERE ARRESTED IN
BOSTON.
THERE WERE NO ARRESTS REPORTED
IN WASHINGTON D.C. WHERE AN
ESTIMATED 25,000 PEOPLE MARCHED
TO THE U.S. CAPITAL.
TODAY MARKS EXACTLY TWO YEARS
SINCE ADAM LANZA KILLED HIS
MOTHER, THEN GUNNED DOWN 20
YOUNG CHILDREN AND SIX ADULTS AT
SANDY HOOK ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IN
NEWTOWN, CONNECTICUT.
LOCAL FIREFIGHTERS WHO WERE
AMONG THE FIRST TO RESPOND TO
THE SHOOTING, LOWERED THEIR
STATION'S FLAG TO HALF-STAFF
THIS MORNING.
CITY LEADERS HAVE DECIDED NOT TO
HOLD ANY PUBLIC CEREMONIES
TODAY.
INSTEAD, THEY'RE CALLING FOR
PRIVATE REFLECTION.
SINCE THE SHOOTING, THE SCHOOL
HAS BEEN DEMOLISHED AND A
HANDFUL OF THE VICTIM'S PARENTS
ARE CONSIDERING PLANS FOR A
PERMANENT MEMORIAL.
MEANWHILE, THE CITY HAS TAKEN
POSSESSION OF THE LANZA HOME,
BUT OFFICIALS HAVE NOT DECIDED
WHAT TO DO WITH IT YET.
WE'LL HAVE MORE FROM CONNECTICUT
IN A MOMENT.
FORMER VICE PRESIDENT DICK
CHENEY DEFENDED THE C.I.A.'S
POST-9/11 INTERROGATION PROGRAM,
DESPITE CRITICISM IN THE WAKE OF
THE SENATE REPORT RELEASED
EARLIER THIS WEEK.
ON NBC'S "MEET THE PRESS" TODAY,
CHENEY SAID THE PROGRAM
CAREFULLY AVOIDED TORTURE.
>> AND THE TECHNIQUES WE DID IN
FACT USE, WHICH THE PRESIDENT
AUTHORIZED, THAT PRODUCED
RESULTS, THAT GAVE US THE
INFORMATION WE NEEDED TO BE ABLE
TO SAFEGUARD THE NATION AGAINST
FURTHER ATTACKS, AND TO BE ABLE
TO TRACK DOWN THOSE GUILTY FOR
9/11, DID IN FACT WORK.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, FOR THE
FIRST TIME IN HISTORY, CLIMATE
CHANGE NEGOTIATORS HAVE COME UP
WITH A PLAN TO LIMIT GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS IN EVERY SINGLE
NATION.
THE AGREEMENT REQUIRES ALL 196
COUNTRIES TO CREATE A DETAILED
PLAN WITHIN THE NEXT SIX MONTHS
TO LIMIT EMISSIONS FROM BURNING
COAL, GAS, AND OIL.
NEGOTIATORS IN PERU HAILED THE
DEAL AS A VICTORY, BUT
ENVIRONMENTAL GROUPS SAY IT
FALLS FAR SHORT OF STAVING OFF
GLOBAL WARMING BECAUSE THERE ARE
NO MEANS TO VERIFY A NATION DOES
WHAT IT SAYS IT WILL DO.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PARENTS OF
SOME OF THE VICTIMS OF THE
SHOOTING AT SANDY HOOK
ELEMENTARY ARE EXPECTED TO
ANNOUNCE TOMORROW THAT THEY ARE
SUING BUSHMASTER, THE
MANUFACTURER OF THE ASSAULT
RIFLE USED BY ADAM LANZA TWO
YEARS AGO TODAY.
SOME OF THOSE PARENTS HAVE ALSO
LOBBIED CONGRESS TO PASS TOUGHER
FEDERAL GUN LAWS.
BUT ACCORDING TO A NEW POLL
RELEASED BY THE PEW RESEARCH
CENTER THIS WEEK, 52% OF
AMERICANS SAY IT'S MORE
IMPORTANT TO PROTECT THE RIGHT
OF AMERICANS TO OWN GUNS.
WHILE 46% SAY IT'S MORE
IMPORTANT TO CONTROL GUN
OWNERSHIP.
YET, CONNECTICUT LEGISLATORS
HAVE BUCKED NATIONAL SENTIMENT,
ENACTING SOME OF THE STRICTEST
GUN REGULATIONS IN THE COUNTRY.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JOHN CARLOS FRAY TRAVELED THERE
TO SEE IF THE NEW RESTRICTIONS
ARE HAVING ANY EFFECT.
>> IT STARTED LIKE ANY OTHER
NORMAL DAY.
GOT THE KIDS READY FOR SCHOOL.
GOT DYLAN TO TAKE HIS VITAMINS,
WHICH HE FOUGHT ME ON EVERY
MORNING, AND WE WENT UP THE
DRIVEWAY TO THE BUS.
AND THAT WAS LAST TIME I SAW HIM
ALIVE.
>> Reporter: NICOLE HOCKLEY'S
SIX YEAR-OLD SON, DYLAN, WHOSE
BRIGHT BLUE EYES AND LAUGH
FILLED A ROOM, WHOSE FAVORITE
FOODS WERE HERSHEY'S CHOCOLATE
BARS, RED DELICIOUS APPLES, AND
GARLIC BREAD, WAS ONE OF 20
CHILDREN AND SIX ADULTS WHO DIED
IN A HAIL OF GUN FIRE AT SANDY
HOOK ELEMENTARY SCHOOL TWO
YEARS-AGO TODAY.
DYLAN WHO WAS AUTISTIC, WAS
FOUND IN THE ARMS OF HIS SCHOOL
AID, ANNE MARIE MURPHY, WHO DIED
TRYING TO SHIELD HIM.
>> IN SOME RESPECTS, THAT MAKES
SO MUCH SENSE, CAUSE SHE
WOULDN'T HAVE LEFT HIM.
SO-- SO THEY DIED TOGETHER.
THERE'S A LOT NICOLE DOESN'T
REMEMBER FROM THAT HORRIBLE DAY,
BUT SHE CLEARLY RECALLS THE MAN
WHO GAVE HER THE NEWS NO PARENT
WANTS TO HEAR, CONNECTICUT
GOVERNOR DAN MALLOY.
MALLOY SPOKE IN A BACK ROOM OF
THE FIREHOUSE WHERE PARENTS HAD
GATHERED.
>> I DID SAY THE-- TO THE
PARENTS.
THAT IF THEY HAD NOT BEEN UNITED
WITH THEIR FAMILY ALREADY, THEN
THEY WERE NOT GOING TO BE UNITED
WITH THEIR FAMILY.
>> AND THE ROOM JUST ERUPTED.
AND I'LL BE HONEST, AT THAT
MOMENT IN TIME I-- I-- I HATED
HIM.
(LAUGHS)
BECAUSE THAT WAS WHO HAD TOLD
ME.
>> Reporter: BUT SINCE THAT
TERRIBLE DAY THE TWO HAVE BECOME
ALLIES IN THE FIGHT FOR NEW GUN
RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS
THAT WOULD KEEP WEAPONS OUT OF
THE HANDS OF THE MENTALLY ILL.
AS THE COMMUNICATIONS DIRECTOR
FOR SANDY HOOK PROMISE, AN
ORGANIZATION FOUNDED IN THE
AFTERMATH OF THE TRAGEDY,
HOCKLEY ADVOCATED IN WASHINGTON,
D.C. FOR NEW LEGISLATION.
>> I'M ONE OF THOSE PEOPLE THAT
I HAVE TO DO SOMETHING TO STOP
IT.
I CAN'T LET IT BE A SENSELESS
TRAGEDY BECAUSE IT WAS A
PREVENTABLE TRAGEDY.
>> Reporter: WHILE FEDERAL
LEGISLATION STALLED IN PARTISAN
GRIDLOCK, IN APRIL OF 2013
GOVERNOR MALLOY SIGNED INTO
CONNECTICUT LAW SOME OF THE MOST
RESTRICTIVE GUN POLICIES IN THE
COUNTRY.
AND WHILE GUN VIOLENCE EXPERTS
SAY IT'S FAR TOO EARLY TO TELL
HOW EFFECTIVE THE NEW LAW IS,
GOVERNOR MALLOY POINTS TO THE
FACT THAT THERE WERE 32% FEWER
MURDERS IN 2013 THAN 2011.
>> WE'VE SEEN A DRAMATIC DROP IN
MURDERS IN OUR STATE.
WE'VE DENIED PEOPLE THE ABILITY
TO PURCHASE WEAPONS BECAUSE THEY
FELL INTO A CATEGORY SUCH AS A
FELONY CONVICTION OR MENTAL
TREATMENT.
>> Reporter: THE NEW CONNECTICUT
LAW STRENGTHENED GUN LAWS THAT
WERE ALREADY ON THE BOOKS,
MAKING BACKGROUND CHECKS
UNIVERSAL FOR ALL GUN AND
AMMUNITION PURCHASES AND
LIMITING THE ABILITY OF THE
MENTALLY ILL TO PURCHASE GUNS.
THE NEW LEGISLATION OUTLAWED
MORE THAN 100 ADDITIONAL ASSAULT
WEAPONS, INCLUDING THE AR-15
SEMI-AUTOMATIC RIFLE THAT ADAM
LANZA USED TO KILL SO MANY AT
SANDY HOOK.
LARGE CAPACITY MAGAZINES HOLDING
MORE THAN TEN ROUNDS WERE BANNED
AS WELL.
>> THIS IS A WEAPON THAT'S BEEN
BANNED IN YOUR STATE.
IT'S BEEN DETERMINED TO BE AN
ASSAULT WEAPON.
AND OBVIOUSLY IT WAS USED IN
SANDY HOOK.
SO WE KNOW THAT IT KILLED QUITE
A FEW PEOPLE.
>> IT DIDN'T KILL 20 SCHOOL
CHILDREN IN SANDY HOOK.
ADAM LANZA KILLED 20 SCHOOL
>> Reporter: 53 YEAR-OLD DOM
BASILE, AN EMPLOYEE FOR THE U.S.
POSTAL SERVICE AND A FIREARMS
INSTRUCTOR IS A GUN COLLECTOR
AND OWNS MANY WEAPONS THAT ARE
NOW OUTLAWED IN THE STATE.
BASILE LEGALLY PURCHASED THESE
GUNS BEFORE THE BAN WENT INTO
EFFECT, SO IS ALLOWED TO KEEP
THEM.
>> PUNISHING ME, AND THOSE LIKE
ME, SOLELY BECAUSE WE LAWFULLY
AND RESPONSIBLY POSSESS THE SAME
TYPE OF PROPERTY THAT HE-- THAT
A CRIMINAL HAD, MAKES ABOUT AS
MUCH LOGICAL SENSE AS PUNISHING
YOU FOR OWNING THE SAME TYPE OF
CAR THAT A DRUNK DRIVER HAD.
>> Reporter: BASILE IS SO
FRUSTRATED ABOUT THE NEW STATE
LAW THAT HE PLANS TO MOVE TO
MAINE, WHERE HE OWNS PROPERTY
AND PLANS TO BUILD HIS OWN GUN
RANGE.
AND BASILE IS NOT ALONE.
A STATE-WIDE POLL TAKEN LAST MAY
FOUND THAT 38% OF VOTERS DO NOT
SUPPORT THE STRICTER GUN
REGULATIONS WHILE 56% WERE IN
FAVOR.
>> BANNING SEMI-AUTOMATIC
WEAPONS, ASSAULT WEAPONS, THE
SIZE OF THE MAGAZINE WOULD HELP
TO DIMINISH MASS SHOOTINGS?
>> IT WOULD CERTAINLY HELP TO
DIMINISH THE NUMBER OF
INDIVIDUALS SHOT IN THOSE
SHOOTINGS, YES.
>> Reporter: DR. DANIEL WEBSTER
IS THE DIRECTOR OF THE JOHNS
HOPKINS CENTER FOR GUN POLICY
AND RESEARCH, A GROUP DEDICATED
TO REDUCING GUN-RELATED INJURIES
AND DEATHS.
WEBSTER SAYS THAT THE MOST
IMPORTANT ASPECT OF
CONNECTICUT'S NEW GUN LAW, WHEN
IT COMES TO MASS SHOOTINGS, IS
MAGAZINE CAPACITY.
ADAM LANZA USED A MAGAZINE WITH
A CAPACITY OF 30 BULLETS.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT DATA FROM
OTHER MASS SHOOTING SCENARIOS,
THERE IS A DIRECT CORRELATION
BETWEEN THE AMMUNITION CAPACITY,
HOW MUCH AMMUNITION AN ASSAILANT
HAS, AND HOW MANY PEOPLE GET
SHOT.
>> Reporter: STATE
REPRESENTATIVE ROB SAMPSON, A
REPUBLICAN, HAS BEEN ONE OF THE
GOVERNOR'S MOST VOCAL OPPONENTS
IN THE STATE HOUSE ON THIS
ISSUE.
HE WAS NAMED A DEFENDER OF
FREEDOM BY THE NATIONAL RIFLE
ASSOCIATION AND BELIEVES THAT
MAGAZINE CAPACITY HAD NOTHING TO
DO WITH HOW MANY CHILDREN WERE
KILLED AT SANDY HOOK ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL.
>> ARMING YOURSELF WITH A 30-
BULLET MAGAZINE WOULD MAKE IT A
LOT EASIER TO MOW PEOPLE DOWN
THEN A TEN BULLET MAGAZINE.
>> WELL...
>> Reporter: IT JUST SEEMS
LOGICAL TO ME.
>> UNFORTUNATELY, IT'S NOT.
YOU CAN CHANGE A MAGAZINE IN
LITERALLY ONE SECOND.
IF I WAS TO SHOOT YOU AND SAY,
"I'M ABOUT TO SHOOT YOU, AND I
HAVE TO CHANGE MAGAZINES FIRST,
BOOM, I'M DONE," YOU'D NEVER GET
TO ME IN TIME.
YOU WOULDN'T EVEN TRY.
I DO NOT BELIEVE IT IS ENOUGH
TIME TO RUSH AN ATTACKER, AND
CERTAINLY NOT IN THE CASE WHEN
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT SECOND
GRADERS.
>> DYLAN WAS SHOT FIVE TIMES.
SO IF WE HAD A TEN MAGAZINE, TEN
BULLET LIMIT, YOU KNOW, INSTEAD
OF A 30, FOR ALL I KNOW DYLAN
COULD BE ALIVE TODAY.
IT'S JUST-- IT'S ABSURD FOR HIM
TO SAY THAT IT WOULDN'T HAVE
MADE A DIFFERENCE.
OF COURSE IT WOULD HAVE MADE A
DIFFERENCE.
AND THERE HAVE BEEN FAR TOO MANY
OTHER SHOOTINGS WHERE A JAM OR A
RELOAD HAS GIVEN AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR SOMEONE TO INTERVENE.
>> Reporter: IN DYLAN'S CLASS
FIVE CHILDREN WERE KILLED AND 11
ESCAPED.
WHILE THE EVENTS OF THE DAY MAY
NEVER BE FULLY CLEAR, SOME SAY
THAT THE CHILDREN FLED WHEN
LANZA'S GUN EITHER JAMMED OR HAD
TO BE RELOADED.
WE DO KNOW, HOWEVER, THAT JARED
LEE LOUGHNER, THE SHOOTER WHO
BADLY INJURED CONGRESSWOMAN
GABRIELLE GIFFORDS AND KILLED
SIX OTHERS NEAR TUCSON, ARIZONA
WAS SUBDUED WHILE HE WAS
RELOADING HIS GUN.
STATE REP. SAMPSON, HOWEVER, IS
NOT PERSUADED BY THIS ARGUMENT
AND POINTS OUT THAT A STUDY ON
THE FEDERAL ASSAULT WEAPONS BAN
THAT EXPIRED IN 2004 FOUND THAT
THE BAN DID NOT LOWER THE NUMBER
OF GUN DEATHS IN THE U.S.
DR. DANIEL WEBSTER AGREES THAT
THE BAN DID LITTLE TO STEM
BROADER GUN VIOLENCE, BUT SAYS
THAT THE STUDY DID NOT FOCUS ON
MASS SHOOTINGS.
>> IT'S WORTH NOTING THAT WHEN
THE BAN EXPIRED IN 2004, THAT
FOLLOWING THAT, WE EXPERIENCED A
GREAT INCREASE IN MASS SHOOTINGS
AND IN PARTICULAR THE NUMBER OF
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE SHOT IN SUCH
SHOOTINGS.
>> Reporter: IN SEPTEMBER THE
F.B.I. RELEASED A STUDY THAT
SUPPORTS WEBSTER'S ANALYSIS.
THE F.B.I. FOUND THAT ACTIVE
SHOOTER INCIDENTS, DEFINED AS AN
INDIVIDUAL ACTIVELY ENGAGED IN
KILLING OR ATTEMPTING TO KILL
PEOPLE IN A CONFINED AREA, HAVE
GONE UP IN THE LAST SEVEN YEARS.
FROM 2000 TO 2007 THERE WERE AN
AVERAGE OF 6.4 INCIDENTS
ANNUALLY.
FROM 2007 TO 2013 THAT AVERAGE
JUMPED TO 16.4 INCIDENTS A YEAR.
GUNS RIGHT'S ADVOCATES ARE NOT
THE ONLY CRITICS OF THE NEW
CONNECTICUT LAW.
DR. SIGURD ACKERMAN IS THE
DIRECTOR OF SILVER HILL
HOSPITAL, A PSYCHIATRIC FACILITY
IN CONNECTICUT.
HE'S CONCERNED ABOUT A
REQUIREMENT IN THE LAW THAT SAYS
MOST PATIENTS WHO ADMIT
THEMSELVES FOR PSYCHIATRIC
TREATMENT MUST BE REPORTED TO
THE STATE.
IF I COME IN BECAUSE I'M BULIMIC
OR BECAUSE I MAY BE SEVERELY
DEPRESSED FROM A BREAKUP, I WILL
HAVE MY GUN RIGHTS TAKEN AWAY?
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
>> Reporter: DO YOU FIND THAT TO
BE PRUDENT?
>> WELL, I FIND THAT TO BE
POTENTIALLY HARMFUL.
IT WILL HAVE THE EFFECT OF
DISCOURAGING MANY PEOPLE FROM
SEEKING TREATMENT BECAUSE
THEY'LL BE REPORTED.
>> Reporter: DR. ACKERMAN SAYS
THAT THE LAW WAS PASSED IN A
HURRY AND HE BELIEVES THAT THE
LAW FOCUSES ON TOO BROAD A
GROUP, WHEN IT SHOULD BE FOCUSED
ON THOSE WHO ACTUALLY POSE A
THREAT.
LIKE THOSE WITH A HISTORY OF
VIOLENT BEHAVIOR.
>> WHAT I'M SAYING IS THAT THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE VOLUNTARILY
ADMITTED TO A PSYCHIATRIC
FACILITY ARE NOT THOSE PEOPLE.
SO THEY'VE GOT THE WRONG GROUP.
>> Reporter: THE LAW'S NOT GOING
TO CATCH POSSIBLE MASS
MURDERERS?
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
>> Reporter: DR. ACKERMAN POINTS
OUT THAT ADAM LANZA WAS NOT
SEEKING TREATMENT FOR MENTAL
ILLNESS, AS A RECENTLY RELEASED
REPORT ABOUT LANZA'S LIFE
REVEALED, SO HE WOULD NOT HAVE
ENDED UP IN A STATE DATABASE OF
THOSE BANNED FROM OWNING A GUN.
BUT GOVERNOR MALLOY SAYS THAT
THE LEGISLATION HAS ALREADY
WORKED.
>> WE ACTUALLY WERE ABLE TO STOP
SOMEONE FROM BUYING A GUN WHO
ADVOCATED OR SAID THAT THEY
WANTED TO USE THAT TO SHOOT UP
ANOTHER SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: ITS THE CASE OF AN
18-YEAR-OLD WOMAN WITH MENTAL
HEALTH ISSUES WHO ADMITTED
HERSELF TO A GROUP HOME FOR
TREATMENT.
SHE ATTEMPTED TO PURCHASE A GUN,
BUT THE GOVERNOR'S OFFICE TOLD
NEWSHOUR THAT SHE WAS PREVENTED
FROM DOING SO BECAUSE HER NAME
WAS IN THE STATE DATABASE.
UPON INVESTIGATION POLICE FOUND
A MANIFESTO ABOUT HER PLANS TO
SHOOT STUDENTS AT TWO HIGH
SCHOOLS.
NICOLE HOCKLEY, MOTHER OF DYLAN,
BELIEVES THE STEPS CONNECTICUT
TOOK HAVE MADE HER STATE SAFER
BUT SHE CONTINUES TO ADVOCATE
FOR OTHER STATES AND THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT TO FOLLOW SUIT.
IT'S TOO EASY, SHE SAYS TO
SIMPLY DRIVE ACROSS STATE LINES
AND BUY A GUN IN STATE WITH LESS
STRICT GUN REGULATIONS.
>> IT HURTS ME IN MY HEART EVERY
DAY WHEN THERE'S ANOTHER MASS
SHOOTING.
SEEING SCENES OF HELICOPTER
FOOTAGE OF CHILDREN RUNNING FROM
SCHOOLS, IT'S JUST-- IT'S
BECOMING FAR TO FAMILIAR A
SIGHT.
THAT ISN'T THE COUNTRY THAT
WE'RE MEANT TO BE.
WE'RE BETTER THAN THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: CONNECTICUT'S
GUN LAWS ARE NOW SOME OF THE
MOST RESTRICTIVE IN THE COUNTRY.
WOULD YOU SUPPORT SIMILAR LAWS
WHERE YOU LIVE?
TAKE OUR POLL AND WEIGH IN AT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: IT'S BOTH THE
DARLING OF WALL STREET AND THE
BAIN OF LOCAL REGULATORS ACROSS
THE COUNTRY AND AROUND THE
WORLD.
UBER IS THE ON-DEMAND CAR
SHARING SERVICE WHICH FACES
LEGAL CHALLENGES IN PORTLAND,
OREGON, WHILE IT IS BANNED FROM
OPERATING IN SOME CITIES
ENTIRELY.
ACKNOWLEDGING THE COMPETITION,
NEW YORK, CHICAGO, AND
WASHINGTON D.C. ARE TRYING TO
FIGHT BACK WITH THEIR OWN CAB
APPS.
AT THE SAME TIME, UBER IS VALUED
AT $41.2 BILLION-- EASILY
OUTPACING EVERY OTHER PRIVATE
STARTUP.
ITS WORTH MORE THAN PUBLICLY
TRADED COMPANIES LIKE DELTA
AIRLINES, CHARLES SCHWAB, AND
KRAFT FOODS.
JOINING US NOW TO DISCUSS THE
UBER BOOM IS LIZ GANNES, A
SENIOR EDITOR AT RE/CODE FROM
SAN FRANCISCO.
THANKS FOSTER JOINING US.
>> SURE.
>> THE RECENT PROBLEM AND
PERHAPS WORST PROBLEM UBER HAS
FACED IS A SITUATION IN INDIA,
WHERE A PASSENGER SAID THE
DRIVER TURNED OFF THE METER AND
TOOK HER SOMEPLACE ELSE AND
RAPED HER.
REALLY THE CORE OF IT IS A LEVEL
OF TRUST AND SECURITY THAT A
USER HAS TO HAVE THAT THEY'RE
SAFE WHEN THEY'RE IN THE CAR.
HOW DOES THIS COMPANY DEAL WITH
THIS CHALLENGE?
>> UBER IN ADDITION TO STEP UP
ITS BACKGROUND CHECKS.
IN INDIA DOESN'T LOOK LIKE THE
LOCAL STATEMENTS WERE THAT GREAT
TO AUTHORIZE THIS SITUATION FOR
THE DRIVER.
AS YOU SAY THIS IS AN APP ON
YOUR PHONE BUT IT'S AN APP THAT
CONNECTS YOU AS A PASSENGER,
PUTTING YOURSELF IN A CAR IN THE
REAL WORLD.
SO YOU REALLY NEED TO TRUST THAT
THAT IS A SITUATION THAT YOU
WILL BE SAFE IN.
COMPARED TO TRADITIONAL TAXIS
THOUGH, THERE IS A LEVEL ABOVE
AND BEYOND ONCE YOU'RE IN THE
CAR AND ONCE SOMEONE IS IN THE
SYSTEM.
I THINK THE ISSUE LEADING UP TO
THIS IS THE BACKGROUND CHECKS.
ONCE YOU'RE DRIVER OR PASSENGER
ON UBER AT THE END OF EVERY RIDE
YOU RATE THE OTHER ONE ON A
SCALE OF 1 TO 5 STARS.
IF YOU DON'T GET FOUR OR FIVE
STARS YOU'RE NOT WELCOME IN THE
SYSTEM ANYMORE.
THAT IS A TRADITIONAL TAXIS,
DOESN'T GET THE BAD GUYS OUT
FROM THE BEGINNING.
>> WHILE WE'VE SAID IT IS BANNED
IN SOME CITIES IT IS WORKING IN
250 CITIES AND THE COMPANY'S
MODUS OPERANDI ASKS FOR
PERMISSION, THAT'S WHY THEY GO
INTO THE MARKET.
THAT'S WHY THEY HAVE LEGAL
TUSSLES.
>> WE'VE NEVER SEEN ANYTHING
LIKE UBER COME OUT LIKE THIS.
THE COMPANY IS FIVE YEARS OLD
AND THEY'RE 250 CITIES AND
THERE'S NO WAY THAT THEY WOULD
BE THAT BIG IF THEY'D GONE
AROUND AND ASKED REGULATORS AND
INCUMBENTS IF IT'S OKAY IF THEY
JOINED AS WELL.
>> THE FACT THAT THIS COMPANY IS
WORTH MORE THAN AN ENTIRE
AIRLINE, WHAT DO INVESTORS SEE
IN IT BEYOND JUST THE CAR
SHARING THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
TODAY?
>> INVESTORS ARE HOPEFUL THAT
UBER BECAUSE IT IS SO GOOD ABOUT
CONNECTING SOMEONE WHO HAS A
NEED TO GET AROUND TOWN AND
SOMEBODY WHO IS ALREADY NEARBY,
WOULD BE LOGISTICS FOR LOT OF
EXPERIMENTS AROUND THAT BUT THAT
IDEA OF KIND OF INSTANT
GRATIFICATION THAT IS POWERED BY
SMART FUNDS, BOTH BY CONSUMERS
AND MORE IMPORTANTLY DRIVERS IS
THIS BIG TECHNOLOGICAL
OPPORTUNITY.
ESPECIALLY INTERNET COMPANIES,
UBER HAS A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT OF
REVENUE.
THEY'RE PRIVATE SO THEY DON'T
DISCLOSE IT.
BUT IT'S UP IN THE BILLIONS FOR
SURE.
WOULDN'T BE GOING OUT TO WALL
STREET IF IT EVER DOES GO PUBLIC
WHICH WE EXPECT IT WOULD DO.
THEY WOULDN'T GO OUT AND SAY
FIGURE OUT THE BUSINESS MODEL
LATER.
THE BUSINESS MODEL IS ALREADY
ENCODED INTO WHAT WE DO.
>> LIZ GANNES, OF SAN FRANCISCO,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR THIS.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR SOME INSIGHT
INTO THE CLIMATE AGREEMENT THAT
WAS REACHED SUNDAY IN LIMA PERU,
EARLIER I SPOKE WITH WILLIAM
MAULDIN OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL."
HERE'S AN EXCERPT OF OUR
CONVERSATION.
>> AT THE END OF THESE TALKS WE
SAW THIS TENSION, THIS FAMILIAR
TENSION, REEMERGE BETWEEN RICH
AND POOR COUNTRIES.
WHAT WAS THE ARGUMENT ABOUT?
>> YES, IT EXPLODED IN THE
EARLY HOURS OF SATURDAY AFTER
THEY WERE ALREADY SUPPOSED TO
HAVE FINISHED AND THAT WAS JUST
ABOUT WHO WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR
DOING THE HEAVY LIFTING FOR
CLIMATE CHANGE.
WHO HAS TO MAKE THE PAINFUL
EMISSIONS CUTS.
UNFORTUNATELY IN THE KYOTO
PROTOCOL IT'S BEEN THE U.S., THE
EUROPEAN UNION OR OTHER
COUNTRIES.
WHO IS TO FINANCE THESE CHANGES
AND WHO IS TO PAY FOR POORER
COUNTRIES TO GET READY FOR
CLIMATE EVENTS IN THE FUTURE?
THAT EXPLODED OUT IN THE OPEN.
WE HAD VENEZUELA AND CHINA
OPPOSING THE ISSUES OUT THERE.
IT TOOK SOME LAST MINUTE EDITS
TO GET TO THE POINT WHERE THEY
WERE READY TO LET THIS GO
FORWARD TO NEGOTIATIONS NEXT
YEAR THAT ARE SUPPOSED TO FINISH
UP IN PARIS.
>> WHAT HAPPENS IN PARIS NOW?
IT SEEMS LIKE IF YOU KICK THE
CAN DOWN THE ROAD SOMEWHERE, YOU
HAVE TO HAVE MEETINGS BEFORE
PARIS.
>> THEY'LL HAVE MEETINGS BEFORE
PARIS, THEY HOPE TO HAMMER OUT A
DEAL THAT WILL CUT EMISSIONS
AFTER 2020 AND BEYOND.
BUT BEFORE THAT THERE'S A LOT OF
WOK TO BE DONE, FIGURING OUT
EXACTLY HOW IT'S GOING TO WORK
WHO'S GOING TO PAY FOR IT, HOW
MUCH COUNTRIES ARE GOING TO CUT.
THEY HAVE TO VOLUNTARILY HAVE TO
SAY HOW MUCH CARBON DIOXIDE TO
CUT IN THE FUTURE.
NAME AND SHAME, ALTHOUGH PEOPLE
INVOLVED DON'T LIKE TO CALL IT
THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: TO SEE THE
ENTIRE INTERVIEW VISIT
NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG
FINALLY TONIGHT A DRONE FLYOVER
IN GAZA, DURING A CELEBRATION BY
THE PALESTINIAN GROUP HAMAS
PROMPTED ISRAEL TO SCRAMBLE ITS
WAR PLANES.
THE HAMAS EVENT WAS MARKING THE
GROUP'S FOUNDING IN 1987.
THE "JERUSALEM POST" REPORTS
DRONE DID NOT CROSS INTO ISRAELI
TERRITORY.
REUTERS IS REPORTING THERE IS A
POSSIBLE END TO THE FED'S
SO-CALLED FREE MONEY PLEDGE.
THE FEDERAL RESERVE IS
CONSIDERING DROPPING ITS
TWO-YEAR DEAL KEEPING INTEREST
RATES CLOSE TO ZERO.
AND FLOODED SPOTS OF SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA ARE BRACING FOR
ANOTHER BOUT OF STORMS.
THE L.A. AREA COULD GET ANOTHER
INCH OF RAIN TOMORROW ON TOP OF
THE FIVE THAT FELL LAST WEEK.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.